content/authors/adsteele/_index.md, before:

+++
bio = "UBC Computer Science and Physics student with interests in machine learning, numerical methods, and software engineering."
email = ""
highlight_name = true
interests = ["Embedded Development", "Machine Learning", "Numerical Methods"]
role = "Combined Honours in Computer Science and Physics"
superuser = true
title = "Alex Steele"
[education]
[[education.courses]]
  course = "BSc in Computer Science and Physics"
  institution = "University of British Columbia"
  year = 2024


[[organizations]]
name = "University of British Columbia"

[[social]]
icon = "envelope"
icon_pack = "fas"
link = "mailto:contact@alexdsteele.com"
[[social]]
icon = "github"
icon_pack = "fab"
link = "https://github.com/ADSteele916"
[[social]]
icon = "linkedin"
icon_pack = "fab"
link = "https://linkedin.com/in/alexdsteele"
[[social]]
icon = "cv"
icon_pack = "ai"
link = "uploads/Alex Steele CV.pdf"


+++

Hello! I'm Alex, a computer science and physics student at the University of British Columbia graduating in 2024. My interests include embedded and application development, machine learning, and numerical methods.

I'm currently a software engineer intern on the passive safety team at Tesla, and the lead teaching assistant for CPSC 110, UBC's major-stream introductory computer science course, where I am responsible for many of our internal systems. In my free time, I contribute to the [UBC Rocket](https://www.ubcrocket.com/) design team as a member of the avionics subteam, enjoy some [light reading](/reading), and work on various [side projects](#projects). I also both help plan and volunteer at [UBC's annual Physics Olympics competition](/post/how-fast-would-one-have-to-throw-a-baseball-to-replicate-a-nuclear-blast/).

In the past, I've worked as a software engineer intern at Kepler Communications and a numerical methods research assistant in UBC's Numerical Linear Algebra Lab. 

I'm not currently looking for co-op opportunities, but I am starting to look for new grad roles beginning in May 2024.

Commit message:

Update to align with 2023 resume

content/authors/adsteele/_index.md, after:

+++
bio = "UBC Computer Science and Physics student with interests in machine learning, numerical methods, and software engineering."
email = ""
highlight_name = true
interests = ["Embedded Development", "Machine Learning", "Numerical Methods"]
role = "Combined Honours in Computer Science and Physics"
superuser = true
title = "Alex Steele"
[education]
[[education.courses]]
  course = "BSc in Computer Science and Physics"
  institution = "University of British Columbia"
  year = 2024


[[organizations]]
name = "University of British Columbia"

[[social]]
icon = "envelope"
icon_pack = "fas"
link = "mailto:contact@alexdsteele.com"
[[social]]
icon = "github"
icon_pack = "fab"
link = "https://github.com/ADSteele916"
[[social]]
icon = "linkedin"
icon_pack = "fab"
link = "https://linkedin.com/in/alexdsteele"
[[social]]
icon = "cv"
icon_pack = "ai"
link = "uploads/Alex Steele Resume.pdf"


+++

Hello! I'm Alex, a computer science and physics student at the University of British Columbia graduating in 2024. My interests include embedded and application development, machine learning, and numerical methods.

I'm currently a software engineer intern on the crash safety team at Tesla, and the lead teaching assistant for CPSC 110, UBC's major-stream introductory computer science course, where I'm responsible for many of our internal systems. In my free time, I contribute to the [UBC Rocket](https://www.ubcrocket.com/) design team as a senior member of the avionics subteam, enjoy some [light reading](/reading), and work on various [side projects](#projects). I also help plan and volunteer at [UBC's annual Physics Olympics competition](/post/how-fast-would-one-have-to-throw-a-baseball-to-replicate-a-nuclear-blast/).

In the past, I've worked as a software engineer intern at Kepler Communications and a numerical methods research assistant in UBC's Numerical Linear Algebra Lab.

I'm actively looking for new grad roles beginning in May 2024. Please feel free to reach out if you have any opportunities available.
